# Introduction

The member should be able to: distinguish between costs included in inventories and costs recognised as expenses in the period in which they are incurred; describe different inventory valuation methods (cost formulas); calculate and compare cost of sales, gross profit, and ending inventory using different inventory valuation methods and using perpetual and periodic inventory systems; calculate and explain how inflation and deflation of inventory costs affect the financial statements and ratios of companies that use different inventory valuation methods; explain LIFO reserve and LIFO liquidation and their effects on financial statements and ratios; convert a company’s reported financial statements from LIFO to FIFO for purposes of comparison; describe the measurement of inventory at the lower of cost and net realisable value; describe implications of valuing inventory at net realisable value for financial statements and ratios; describe the financial statement presentation of and disclosures relating to inventories; explain issues that analysts should consider when examining a company’s inventory disclosures and other sources of information; calculate and compare ratios of companies, including companies that use different inventory methods; analyze and compare the financial statements of companies, including companies that use different inventory methods.

## Summary

Inventories are a major factor in the analysis of merchandising and manufacturing companies. Such companies generate their sales and profits through inventory transactions on a regular basis. An important consideration in determining profits for these companies is measuring the cost of sales when inventories are sold., The total cost of inventories comprises all costs of purchase, costs of conversion, and other costs incurred in bringing the inventories to their present location and condition. Storage costs of finished inventory and abnormal costs due to waste are typically treated as expenses in the period in which they occurred., The allowable inventory valuation methods implicitly involve different assumptions about cost flows. The choice of inventory valuation method determines how the cost of goods available for sale during the period is allocated between inventory and cost of sales., IFRS allow three inventory valuation methods (cost formulas): first-in, first-out (FIFO); weighted average cost; and specific identification. The specific identification method is used for inventories of items that are not ordinarily interchangeable and for goods or services produced and segregated for specific projects. US GAAP allow the three methods above plus the last-in, first-out (LIFO) method. The LIFO method is widely used in the United States for both tax and financial reporting purposes because of potential income tax savings., The choice of inventory method affects the financial statements and any financial ratios that are based on them. As a consequence, the analyst must carefully consider inventory valuation method differences when evaluating a company’s performance over time or in comparison to industry data or industry competitors., A company must use the same cost formula for all inventories having a similar nature and use to the entity., The inventory accounting system (perpetual or periodic) may result in different values for cost of sales and ending inventory when the weighted average cost or LIFO inventory valuation method is used., Under US GAAP, companies that use the LIFO method must disclose in their financial notes the amount of the LIFO reserve or the amount that would have been reported in inventory if the FIFO method had been used. This information can be used to adjust reported LIFO inventory and cost of goods sold balances to the FIFO method for comparison purposes., LIFO liquidation occurs when the number of units in ending inventory declines from the number of units that were present at the beginning of the year. If inventory unit costs have generally risen from year to year, this will produce an inventory-related increase in gross profits., Consistency of inventory costing is required under both IFRS and US GAAP. If a company changes an accounting policy, the change must be justifiable and applied retrospectively to the financial statements. An exception to the retrospective restatement is when a company reporting under US GAAP changes to the LIFO method., Under IFRS, inventories are measured at the lower of cost and net realisable value. Net realisable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less the estimated costs necessary to make the sale. Under US GAAP, inventories are measured at the lower of cost, market value, or net realisable value depending upon the inventory method used. Market value is defined as current replacement cost subject to an upper limit of net realizable value and a lower limit of net realizable value less a normal profit margin. Reversals of previous write-downs are permissible under IFRS but not under US GAAP., Reversals of inventory write-downs may occur under IFRS but are not allowed under US GAAP., Changes in the carrying amounts within inventory classifications (such as raw materials, work-in-process, and finished goods) may provide signals about a company’s future sales and profits. Relevant information with respect to inventory management and future sales may be found in the Management Discussion and Analysis or similar items within the annual or quarterly reports, industry news and publications, and industry economic data., The inventory turnover ratio, number of days of inventory ratio, and gross profit margin ratio are useful in evaluating the management of a company’s inventory., Inventory management may have a substantial impact on a company’s activity, profitability, liquidity, and solvency ratios. It is critical for the analyst to be aware of industry trends and management’s intentions., Financial statement disclosures provide information regarding the accounting policies adopted in measuring inventories, the principal uncertainties regarding the use of estimates related to inventories, and details of the inventory carrying amounts and costs. This information can greatly assist analysts in their evaluation of a company’s inventory management.

## Learning Outcomes

The member should be able to: distinguish between costs included in inventories and costs recognised as expenses in the period in which they are incurred; describe different inventory valuation methods (cost formulas); calculate and compare cost of sales, gross profit, and ending inventory using different inventory valuation methods and using perpetual and periodic inventory systems; calculate and explain how inflation and deflation of inventory costs affect the financial statements and ratios of companies that use different inventory valuation methods; explain LIFO reserve and LIFO liquidation and their effects on financial statements and ratios; convert a company’s reported financial statements from LIFO to FIFO for purposes of comparison; describe the measurement of inventory at the lower of cost and net realisable value; describe implications of valuing inventory at net realisable value for financial statements and ratios; describe the financial statement presentation of and disclosures relating to inventories; explain issues that analysts should consider when examining a company’s inventory disclosures and other sources of information; calculate and compare ratios of companies, including companies that use different inventory methods; analyze and compare the financial statements of companies, including companies that use different inventory methods.

## Technical Note

**Summary:**

Inventories comprise costs of purchase, conversion, and storage. Three IFRS-allowed inventory valuation methods (FIFO, weighted average cost, specific identification) determine cost allocation between inventory and cost of sales. US GAAP allows LIFO as well. The choice of method affects financial statements and ratios. Different inventory systems (perpetual or periodic) can yield different cost of sales and ending inventory values under certain methods. LIFO reserve and liquidation can impact gross profits. FIFO and LIFO balances can be converted for comparison. Inventories can be valued at lower of cost and net realisable value (IFR